---
layout: post
title: "A critical analysis of Laravel"
date: 2017-01-28 16:00:00 +100
comments: false
---

## Introduction

<!--excerpt-start-->

Laravel is probably the closest thing that the PHP community has to 
Marmite, it seems you either love it or hate it. It's proponents love
how easy it makes developing software; whereas it's detractors accuse 
the framework of promoting bad practices. They can't both be right or
can they? 

<!--excerpt-end-->

As a software architecture consultant, I don't usually have the luxury 
of choosing the framework I am working with; by the time I join a team 
several years of development has often been invested into the current 
choice. This gives me a somewhat rare insight as I have worked with 
all three of the big framework names: Zend, Symfony and Laravel. 

On twitter, I am usually on the negative side of the Laravel debate but
it is not very easy to cover why in 140 chars. This post is my 
professional analysis of Laravel as a framework and a recommended read 
for any greenfield project considering Laravel as a framework. This is
general purpose advice and your own use case should be considered as well.
If you want tailored advice to your circumstances, get in touch and we
can work something out.

## Laravel as a product

The first point that has to be made when talking about Laravel is that
it is an excellent piece of engineering. Whaaaaaatttt? I hear you exclaim.
Let me explain. Laravel's stated goals are to enable rapid development of
new applications and to make development an enjoyable experience. I 
contend that it meets both goals quite well. That is not to say Laravel
is the best thing since sliced bread or that you should use it 
unconditionally for everything. Consider a goal to move people from A 
to B and make it exciting; if you delivered a trebuchet you would meet 
those goals and could have engineered a great product but it wouldn't 
make it the best mode of transport.

If initial development speed is something which is very important to you, 
perhaps for a side project which you don't know if it will be successful 
and want to test the market before you commit to a larger investment of 
time or money, it would be hard to argue that there is a better option 
than Laravel. However for a company who plans a long term investment in 
a system, initial development speed isn't the only thing they must consider:
total cost of ownership also plays a factor and the later life of a Laravel
system will likely prove more costly than other choices.

Laravel also claims to support industry best practices such as unit testing 
and dependency injection - this is true and it also hides a lot of the
complexity of these things from the developer making it much easier for 
someone inexperienced in these things to start using them. A downside to 
the magic code used to do this is that it hide the implementation from 
the developer which means if something goes wrong or you need to go a bit 
off book you end up fighting the framework to do so.

## Laravel as a project

Considering Laravel as a project, it has many up sides. It is open source,
having many contributors; not just to the framework but to it's many 
optional components and third party modules. Googling for Laravel + thing
you wish to integrate with will usually bring back a module to help you,
this isn't unique to Laravel, but it demonstrates that it has a high level
of adoption.

The documentation is detailed and up to date including both written and 
video tutorials. Additionally there is alot of third part blogs and 
articles on using Laravel. Laravel has a vibrant and dedicated community 
- there are several Laravel specific conferences across the world further 
proving the level of support available should you choose to use Laravel. 

In my view the only downside from the project/community side can only 
really come from the benevolent dictator project management model. This
is something which works well for other high profile projects such as 
the Linux kernel, but there is always a risk that the current community 
could fracture into several competing forks should Taylor Otwell ever 
decide to step away from the project.

## Laravel as a choice 

So now to the key part of this post, should you choose to use Laravel 
for a project? Until now, I've had mostly good things to say about the 
framework so you may be thinking it's a fairly safe bet; but as I hinted 
at the beginning the engineering choices made to enable speed of 
development can come back to bite you later on. 

It is often argued that all of the features which get the most negative 
feedback are "optional" and you are free to develop in what ever way 
you choose but this is a misnomer - if Laravel has been developed 
specifically to enable development speed and enjoyment but you then 
choose not to use the features that enable this then Laravel has just 
lost it's unique selling point over equally mature frameworks such as 
Symfony and Zend.

So what exactly is the issues you will face with Laravel, used as documented?
What is it that gets some of the biggest names in PHP development so 
riled up on twitter? I've picked a trio of Laravels features which 
make it quick to develop with to elaborate on how they endanger the 
long term health of your project.

#### Facades

Facades are always the first thing that is pointed to by anyone arguing 
against Laravel. For anyone who doesn't know a facade looks like this:

```
$item = Cache::get('item');
```

The first thing you'll scream is: "static access is completly untestable 
why would you do such a thing!" Well Laravel has an interesting solution 
for that:

``` 
Cache::shouldRecieve('get')->with('item')->andReturn('data');
```

That's right in your unit test you can call shouldRecieve on a facade 
object and mock it out making it testable again. Yay! Of course calling 
shouldRecieve on a facade at any poiny in your code will turn it into 
a mock object but your code reviews can catch that sort of thing right?

So if facades are testable what makes them so bad? There are two main 
gripes I have with people using facades: 

Static access means you can use them /anywhere/ in your code base. Want 
to cache something from within your models? Sure you can do that. Need 
to charge a credit card in your view layer? Go for it. The fact that 
developers can and will call infrastructure layer code from wherever 
happens to be convenient breaks normal conventions of having separate 
layers of code for separate concerns and stores up a maintenance 
nightmare for future you to deal with.

Facades produce hidden dependencies. I spend a lot of my time reviewing 
code; it is one of the best ways to catch bugs and other issues having 
dependencies of a class neatly defined in the constructor helps understanding 
the code quickly. Hunting for any calls to facades is much slower. It
is also impossible to easily tell the difference between a call to a 
facade and a call to a regular static class method. 

#### Dependency auto wiring

The talk around hidden dependencies invariably leads onto the defence 
that Laravel does dependency injection as well, so you could just use 
that instead of facades and have it auto wire your classes with their 
dependencies - no facades needed.

This seems like it's great, the only issue is that it does it based on
type hints using reflection, Laravel will look up inside it's service 
container a class which matches your type hint. This works great 90% of 
the time but you run into problems when you need to inject a dependency
that isn't a class or for which there are multiple possible dependencies
(eg two different database classes) 

Laravel gives you the tools to resolve these issues but in my experience 
developer tend not to use them, instead falling back to facades or "over 
injecting" eg passing in the entire config object when all that was needed
was a single API key. It should also be pointed out that Laravel has no 
support for custom factory classes - the only way you can gain control 
over service creation is to inject a closure into the service manager.

This isn't the only weirdness with the container if you deal with any 
"newable" objects such as commands; (which are infact both commands and
command handlers at the same time) you have to pass your data in the 
constructor and once dispatched Laravel will pass dependencies into the
handle method. A saner implementation would separate the data object 
representing a command from the class which handles that command 
removing the need for this inconsistency. 

#### Eloquent "ORM"

The final stop on our tour of features which make Laravel a poor choice
for long lived projects is Eloquent; Laravel's database abstraction 
layer. There are several patterns which are used for ORM's, one is the 
data mapper pattern, where a translator class maps fields in your object 
to database fields. Another is the active record pattern where by your 
object becomes a representation of a specific database row. Eloquent follows
the active record pattern. (For contrast, Doctrine 2 is a data mapper)
 
Eloquent is one of those features which again, enables rapid development
but in doing so sacrifices maintainability: each of the models support 
static methods to query and update them which has the same issues as the
facades in cost of long term maintenance but this is arguably worse as it
sits this right in the heart of your software.
 
The active record pattern is bad here for two main reasons.
 
One it couples your entire codebase (via the model) to your database structure. 
This often means that a change to a database column can end up with changes
throughout your model, controller, forms and views - a data mapper ORM could 
handle this via a change in the mapping information, without necessitating a 
change in your domain model code.

Two it couples your domain model to Laravel itself; people argue as to how bad
this is since "they are never going to change framework" but consider this. 
Coupling to a framework is not bad because it prevents you moving from Laravel
to Zend; it's bad because it causes you extra work to go from Laravel 5 to 
Laravel 6. This may mean you are stuck for a while on an older (perhaps 
insecure) version until you can convince the business that it is worth the 
time investment to upgrade - a looser coupling would reduce the changes 
required.

Every pattern for creating maintainable, testable software puts infrastructure 
code eg database access at the highest level, meaning nothing below it is aware
of the infrastructure and how it operates. This allows for clear separation of
concerns and trivial mocking for testing purposes. Eloquent puts database access
concerns right in the middle of everything. 


## Conclusion

Every tool has a purpose, a task at which it excels over others but 
whenever you optimise for one task it comes at the expense of other 
tasks (No free lunch theorem). Laravel is no exception to this, it 
definitely has a place in the PHP eco system as it fulfills a role that
no other framework does as well: it enables rapid application 
development. 

Does this mean you should use it for every project? No. 

My recommendation when it comes to Laravel is simple: if you are building
a prototype application to test the market - use Laravel (but make sure the 
business understands it needs to be thrown away and rebuild if it's a success). 
If you are building coco cola's marketing site for the world cup (a site which 
will have a shelf life of ~ 6 months) use Laravel. If you are building 
a business critical system which will evolve with the business over 
the next five to ten years do NOT use Laravel.